To me, but it’s to you
Are.na texts from my private to: me channel


february ‘25 / turku
i looove taking care of my body & soul. every morning im excited to eat breakfast and fill my belly. i love putting eye cream and feeling the moisture entering through my eyelids. i love drinking water after sauna. i love when i understand that pain is the precursor of growth and make my peace with it. i love to feel like im loaded with love ready to unleash it onto to the world, exactly like the sun blesses everyone with its warmth, no exceptions, i want everyone to feel my heart. try touching it, i give it to you freely. it may explode


october ‘24 / bb
pocit ze mas nejake superpowers, dotkla som sa kavovaru a zdalo sa mi ze sa ochladil a zacal hriat.. moja prva myslienka bola wow co ked som elza a potom mi hned napadlo ze ked som bola mala, mavala taketo myslienky a ze mi to celkom chybalo, byt delulu


september ‘24 / nivy
po pár hodinách strávených čakaním na autobusovej stanici začnem ostatných ľudí vnímať ako návštevníkov, nováčikov.. hovorím si, či je možné brať takéto prechodné miesto vôbec ako domov
toľko zvukov..
dievča hrá na klavír a na chvíľu preruší alarm, tiché tóny sa však zlievajú s hudbou obchodného centra


march ‘24 / brno
i think living with bara gave me some perspective on living with someone u like and want to spend time with in general. it's really important to give ourselves some space. mentally and physically - just not being selfish and understanding that we are each our own persons, growing on our own, yet our leaves touch sometimes


december ‘23 / NMnV
when i was little, there was a house opposite to my grandparents' home in Nové Mesto nad Váhom. a woman who was born there moved to Bratislava, but she visited sometimes, so she asked my grandma to take care of the garden, in return for its delicious goods and a cat (who happily moved to our place). i remember i found a ladybug there once and my grandma told me to take it to our garden so it would eat aphids on our vegetables. i took it in my palms and ran with the greatest mix of feelings - wonder, for the ladybug and its amazing aphid-destruction capabilities, for my grandma and this mind-blowing knowledge she had, fear of the ladybug dying or escaping, and also unease from stealing it.