The Sorrows of Young Werther
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

MAY 26.
You know of old my ways of settling anywhere, of selecting a little
cottage in some cosy spot, and of putting up in it with every
inconvenience. Here, too, I have discovered such a snug, comfortable
place, which possesses peculiar charms for me.
About a league from the town is a place called Walheim. (The reader
need not take the trouble to look for the place thus designated.
We have found it necessary to change the names given in the original.)
It is delightfully situated on the side of a hill; and, by proceeding
along one of the footpaths which lead out of the village, you can
have a view of the whole valley. A good old woman lives there,
who keeps a small inn. She sells wine, beer, and coffee, and is
cheerful and pleasant notwithstanding her age. The chief charm
of this spot consists in two linden-trees, spreading their enormous
branches over the little green before the church, which is entirely
surrounded by peasants' cottages, barns, and homesteads. I have
seldom seen a place so retired and peaceable; and there often have
my table and chair brought out from the little inn, and drink my
coffee there, and read my Homer. Accident brought me to the spot
one fine afternoon, and I found it perfectly deserted. Everybody
was in the fields except a little boy about four years of age, who
was sitting on the ground, and held between his knees a child about
six months old: he pressed it to his bosom with both arms, which
thus formed a sort of arm-chair; and, notwithstanding the liveliness
which sparkled in its black eyes, it remained perfectly still.
The sight charmed me. I sat down upon a plough opposite, and
sketched with great delight this little picture of brotherly
tenderness. I added the neighbouring hedge, the barn-door, and
some broken cart-wheels, just as they happened to lie; and I found
in about an hour that I had made a very correct and interesting
drawing, without putting in the slightest thing of my own. This
confirmed me in my resolution of adhering, for the future, entirely
to nature. She alone is inexhaustible, and capable of forming the
greatest masters. Much may be alleged in favour of rules, as much
may be likewise advanced in favour of the laws of society: an
artist formed upon them will never produce anything absolutely bad
or disgusting; as a man who observes the laws, and obeys decorum,
can never be an absolutely intolerable neighbour, nor a decided
villain: but yet, say what you will of rules, they destroy the
genuine feeling of nature, as well as its true expression. Do not
tell me "that this is too hard, that they only restrain and prune
superfluous branches, etc." My good friend, I will illustrate
this by an analogy. These things resemble love. A warmhearted
youth becomes strongly attached to a maiden: he spends every hour
of the day in her company, wears out his health, and lavishes his
fortune, to afford continual proof that he is wholly devoted to
her. Then comes a man of the world, a man of place and respectability,
and addresses him thus: "My good young friend, love is natural;
but you must love within bounds. Divide your time: devote a portion
to business, and give the hours of recreation to your mistress.
Calculate your fortune; and out of the superfluity you may make
her a present, only not too often, -- on her birthday, and such
occasions." Pursuing this advice, he may become a useful member 
of society, and I should advise every prince to give him an
appointment; but it is all up with his love, and with his genius
if he be an artist. O my friend! why is it that the torrent of
genius so seldom bursts forth, so seldom rolls in full-flowing
stream, overwhelming your astounded soul? Because, on either side
of this stream, cold and respectable persons have taken up their
abodes, and, forsooth, their summer-houses and tulip-beds would
suffer from the torrent; wherefore they dig trenches, and raise
embankments betimes, in order to avert the impending danger.

...

JUNE 16.
"Why do I not write to you?" You lay claim to learning, and ask
such a question. You should have guessed that I am well -- that
is to say -- in a word, I have made an acquaintance who has won
my heart: I have -- I know not.
To give you a regular account of the manner in which I have become
acquainted with the most amiable of women would be a difficult task.
I am a happy and contented mortal, but a poor historian.
An angel! Nonsense! Everybody so describes his mistress; and yet
I find it impossible to tell you how perfect she is, or why she is
so perfect: suffice it to say she has captivated all my senses.
So much simplicity with so much understanding -- so mild, and yet
so resolute -- a mind so placid, and a life so active.
But all this is ugly balderdash, which expresses not a single
character nor feature. Some other time -- but no, not some other
time, now, this very instant, will I tell you all about it. Now
or never. Well, between ourselves, since I commenced my letter,
I have been three times on the point of throwing down my pen, of
ordering my horse, and riding out. And yet I vowed this morning
that I would not ride to-day, and yet every moment I am rushing
to the window to see how high the sun is.
I could not restrain myself -- go to her I must. I have just
returned, Wilhelm; and whilst I am taking supper I will write to
you. What a delight it was for my soul to see her in the midst
of her dear, beautiful children, -- eight brothers and sisters!

...

JULY 10.
You should see how foolish I look in company when her name is
mentioned, particularly when I am asked plainly how I like her.
How I like her! I detest the phrase. What sort of creature must
he be who merely liked Charlotte, whose whole heart and senses
were not entirely absorbed by her. Like her! Some one asked me
lately how I liked Ossian.

...

JULY 13.
No, I am not deceived. In her dark eyes I read a genuine interest
in me and in my fortunes. Yes, I feel it; and I may believe my
own heart which tells me -- dare I say it? -- dare I pronounce
the divine words? -- that she loves me!
That she loves me! How the idea exalts me in my own eyes! And,
as you can understand my feelings, I may say to you, how I honour
myself since she loves me!
Is this presumption, or is it a consciousness of the truth? I do
not know a man able to supplant me in the heart of Charlotte; and
yet when she speaks of her betrothed with so much warmth and
affection, I feel like the soldier who has been stripped of his
honours and titles, and deprived of his sword.

...

SEPTEMBER 3.
I sometimes cannot understand how she can love another, how she
dares love another, when I love nothing in this world so completely,
so devotedly, as I love her, when I know only her, and have no
other possession.

...

OCTOBER 30.
One hundred times have I been on the point of embracing her.
Heavens! what a torment it is to see so much loveliness passing
and repassing before us, and yet not dare to lay hold of it!
And laying hold is the most natural of human instincts. Do not
children touch everything they see? And I!

...

NOVEMBER 3.
Witness, Heaven, how often I lie down in my bed with a wish, and
even a hope, that I may never awaken again. And in the morning,
when I open my eyes, I behold the sun once more, and am wretched.
If I were whimsical, I might blame the weather, or an acquaintance,
or some personal disappointment, for my discontented mind; and then
this insupportable load of trouble would not rest entirely upon
myself. But, alas! I feel it too sadly. I am alone the cause
of my own woe, am I not? Truly, my own bosom contains the source
of all my sorrow, as it previously contained the source of all my
pleasure. Am I not the same being who once enjoyed an excess of
happiness, who, at every step, saw paradise open before him, and
whose heart was ever expanded toward the whole world? And this
heart is now dead, no sentiment can revive it; my eyes are dry;
and my senses, no more refreshed by the influence of soft tears,
wither and consume my brain. I suffer much, for I have lost the
only charm of life: that active, sacred power which created worlds
around me, -- it is no more. When I look from my window at the
distant hills, and behold the morning sun breaking through the
mists, and illuminating the country around, which is still wrapped
in silence, whilst the soft stream winds gently through the willows,
which have shed their leaves; when glorious nature displays all
her beauties before me, and her wondrous prospects are ineffectual
to extract one tear of joy from my withered heart, I feel that in
such a moment I stand like a reprobate before heaven, hardened,
insensible, and unmoved. Oftentimes do I then bend my knee to the
earth, and implore God for the blessing of tears, as the desponding
labourer in some scorching climate prays for the dews of heaven
to moisten his parched corn.
But I feel that God does not grant sunshine or rain to our
importunate entreaties. And oh, those bygone days, whose memory
now torments me! why were they so fortunate? Because I then
waited with patience for the blessings of the Eternal, and received
his gifts with the grateful feelings of a thankful heart.

...

DECEMBER 6.
How her image haunts me! Waking or asleep, she fills my entire
soul! Soon as I close my eyes, here, in my brain, where all the
nerves of vision are concentrated, her dark eyes are imprinted.
Here -- I do not know how to describe it; but, if I shut my eyes,
hers are immediately before me: dark as an abyss they open upon
me, and absorb my senses.
And what is man -- that boasted demigod? Do not his powers fail
when he most requires their use? And whether he soar in joy, or
sink in sorrow, is not his career in both inevitably arrested?
And, whilst he fondly dreams that he is grasping at infinity,
does he not feel compelled to return to a consciousness of his
cold, monotonous existence?
